# Chapter 9

) CAPM is particularly useful in capital budgeting decisions, as it helps determine the appropriate discount rate for evaluating investment projects. Company and Project Costs of Capital The company cost of capital is the opportunity cost of capital for an investment in all the firm’s assets and is the correct discount rate for its average-risk projects. The opportunity cost of capital must correctly reflect this minimum acceptable return for both shareholders and debtholders If the company has no debt outstanding, the company cost of capital equals its cost of equity, the expected rate of return on the company’s common stock. b A B A 0.6 B 0.3 A r − rf = bmarket(rmarketindex − rf ) + bsize(rsfs − rlfs) + bbv/mv(rhighbv/mv − rlowbv/mv) βmarket βsize βbook value/market value Corporate Finance 86 We can use the CAPM in this case to determine cost of capital (thus, cost of equity/discount rate) If the risk-free rate is , the market risk premium is and the firm’s common stock has a beta of , then the expected rate of return would be: If, as is normally the case, the firm is also financed by debtholders (i.e., it has outstanding debt), we can no longer rely solely on the expected return required by shareholders. Instead, we must calculate a weighted average of the expected returns required by both shareholders and debtholders. Where = market value of equity = market value of debt = total value of the firm = cost of equity (from CAPM) = cost of debt = corporate tax rate represents the percentage of capital provided by shareholders (equity), and represents the percentage of capital provided by debtholders (debt) This weighted average is known as the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC). Importantly, WACC is calculated after tax, and here's why. Because in calculating the weighted average of cost of capital we take into account the tax saving of debt. When a firm borrows money, it pays interest on that debt. This interest is tax-deductible, meaning it reduces the firm's taxable income—the amount on which the firm calculates and pays taxes. This creates what’s known as a tax saving or tax shield. To account for this benefit, we adjust the expected rate of return on debt by multiplying it by the aftertax cost of debt This adjustment reflects the fact that the effective after-tax cost of debt is lower than the stated interest rate, thanks to the tax deduction. For practical reasons, we consider all potential new projects as if they are entirely equity-financed. This means we do not account for the tax savings from debt when estimating cash flows. Therefore, we must include the tax shield from debt — the tax saving — when calculating the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC). it’s useful next time when you will calculate the discount rate of a new project of investment. WACC represents the minimum return the firm must earn on its investments to satisfy both shareholders and debtholders. In other words, it’s the return that investors (equity and debt holders) expect, given the risk of providing capital to that specific firm. Now we have learnt how to calculate the discount rate. But be careful — in the real world, the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) used for a specific investment project must be the correct one. In other words, it is not necessarily the same as the WACC for the entire company. You can use the company's overall WACC to discount the future cash flows of a new project only if the risk profile of the project is comparable to that of the company as a whole and the capital structure (i.e. the proportions of equity and debt financing) used for the project is the same as that of the company. r = rf + β(rm − rf ) 2% 7% 0.5 r = 0.02 + 0.5 × 0.07 = 5.5% WACC = ( r + V E ) e ( r (1 − V D ) d tc) E D V = E + D re rd tc V E V D (1 − tc) Corporate Finance 87 Clearly, if either the risk level or the financing structure of a specific project differs from the rest of the company, then you must adjust the WACC accordingly. There’s no change in the formula — it remains the same — but you will need to calculate a new WACC tailored to that particular project. What about Investments That Are Not Average Risk? The company cost of capital is not the correct discount rate if a new investment project is more or less risky than the firm’s existing business. Each project should, in principle, be evaluated at its own opportunity cost of capital. Thanks to the fact that the present values (PVs) of investment projects can be added together, the value of a company is equal to the sum of the present values of all its future investment projects. Here, and are valued just as if they were mini-firms that stockholders could invest in directly. Investors would value by discounting its forecasted cash flows at a rate reflecting the risk of . They would value by discounting at a rate reflecting the risk of . The two discount rates will, in general, be different. In other words, if you are an investor considering buying the company, paying a price equal to the sum of the PVs of all future projects would be considered the correct price. Why? Because it’s the price that ensures the investor receives the opportunity cost of capital — that is, the minimum required return — given the expected cash flows from the company’s various ongoing and future investment projects. Estimating Beta To calculate the WACC you need an estimate of the cost of equity ( ), as well as an estimate of the cost of debt. As for and as already seen, you can use the CAPM: So you need to estimate the future beta of the company’s stock, but lacking a crystal ball, you turn first to historical evidence. Therefore, you need some observations representing the return on the stock and the return on the market. Each pair of observations at a particular time (return on the stock and return on the market) are then put in a graph as a dot and you have to fit the best line through the points. The slope of this line is an estimate of beta. How can you estimate the asset beta of a share? A company’s asset beta is a weighted average of its debt and equity betas So, if a company has no debt outstanding, its asset beta must also be it’s equity beta. Firm value = PV (AB) = PV (A) + PV (B) PV (A) PV (B) A A B B rE rE rE = rf + β(rm − rf ) Corporate Finance 88 in case of both debt and equity outstanding we need to considerate a portfolio of all debt and equity financing The weights of debt and equity in such a portfolio would be again and calculated from market values. This is the measure of a project risk. The value of asset beta depends on three factors that can increase or decrease it. One of these factors is called cyclicality. This refers to whether a security belongs to a cyclical or non-cyclical sector. Some sectors are cyclical, meaning when there is a negative economic event, such as rising interest rates or inflation, the returns of securities in these sectors tend to fall. Most securities fall into this category — for example, those in consumer goods or manufacturing. In contrast, non-cyclical sectors are less affected by economic downturns. For instance, if you produce oil or gas, an increase in oil or gas prices may be good news, as it boosts your returns. In such cases, oil and gas sectors can behave in a non-cyclical or even counter-cyclical way. Another factor that affects beta is called operating leverage. It refers to the proportion of fixed costs to total costs within a firm Basically, the higher the proportion of fixed costs, the higher the operating leverage — and the higher the beta of the security. This is because systematic events tend to have a stronger impact on firms with a high fixed-cost structure. These firms cannot easily adjust their costs in response to changes in the market. If the economy worsens, fixed costs remain high and eat into profits; if the economy improves, those same fixed costs mean profits can rise sharply. This greater sensitivity to market conditions results in a higher beta. So, the higher the operating leverage, the higher the risk exposure to systematic factors — and, therefore, the higher the beta of the stock.” The third factor that influences beta is financial leverage. This refers to the amount of debt in a company's capital structure. If a company has a high level of debt, it becomes more difficult to manage or absorb the impact of systematic risks. When adverse market events occur, firms with significant debt obligations may struggle to meet their repayments, increasing their overall risk. As a result, the higher the proportion of debt in the capital structure, the higher the financial leverage — and the higher the beta of the security. Other risks A project's value depends not only on cash-flow risk but also on its sensitivity to changes in the discount rate. Projects with long-term cash flows are more affected by changes in interest rates and market risk premiums, making them more sensitive (higher beta), even if they don’t have high operating leverage or strong links to the business cycle. Project Analysis (