# Chapter 10

) Sensitivity and Scenario Analysis Now we need to focus more on the process, as capital budgeting is, in fact, a process involving many individuals within a company. It is generally considered a bottom-up process, meaning it begins at the lower levels of the organisation and progresses upwards through the hierarchy. V D V E Asset beta = βA = βD + V D βE V E Corporate Finance 89 For example, lower-level managers may propose new investment projects to higher management for approval. In some cases, the significance of a proposed investment is so substantial that the decision must be made by the Chief Financial Officer or even the Board of Directors. As a financial manager, your work is by no means certain, due to the inherent problems of uncertainty and risk. It is very rare—if not unheard of—for a financial manager to propose only one forecast for a new investment project. Instead, they typically present at least two possible scenarios: a pessimistic and an optimistic version of the projected cash flows and related calculations. Naturally, if the Net Present Value (NPV) remains positive in both the optimistic and pessimistic cases, the likelihood of the project being accepted increases. There are two main approaches to developing alternative versions of investment project forecasts. One of these is known as sensitivity analysis. Whenever managers are given a cash-flow forecast in capital budgeting, they try to determine what else may happen and the implications of these possible surprise events. This is called sensitivity analysis. Specifically, in order to increase the chances of their proposals being accepted, financial managers must prepare both pessimistic and optimistic versions of the projected outcomes. These scenarios are based on the worst-case and best-case forecasts for each key variable relevant to the project. For example, in the optimistic version, the financial manager would assume the highest possible number of units sold and the highest sales prices, while estimating the lowest possible production costs. The opposite applies in the pessimistic version. Sensitivity analysis boils down to expressing cash flows in terms of key project variables and then calculating the consequences of misestimating those variables. It forces the manager to identify the crucial determinants of the project’s success and indicates where additional information would be most useful or where design changes may be needed. However, there are two main disadvantages to this approach: First, the definitions of "pessimistic" and "optimistic" are subjective. For instance, one financial manager may define an optimistic forecast as a 10% increase in units sold compared to the pessimistic version, while another may consider 10% too conservative and define optimism as a 20% increase. This highlights the issue of subjectivity and the discretionary power of the evaluator. Second, sensitivity analysis does not consider the correlation between key variables. For example, it is unrealistic to assume that revenue can increase while costs remain at their lowest. If production increases, revenue will likely increase, but so will production costs. For example, if inflation pushes prices to the upper end of your range, it is quite probable that costs will also be inflated. And if sales are unexpectedly high, you may need to invest more in working capital Sensitivity analysis treats variables independently, without accounting for the relationships between them—this limits its accuracy and usefulness in real-world investment decisionmaking. Sensitivity analysis is not a substitute for the NPV rule, but if you know the danger points, you may be able to modify the project or resolve some of the uncertainty before your company undertakes the investment. An alternative to sensitivity analysis is scenario analysis In scenario analysis, we consider at least some of the possible relationships between the key variables that influence the outcome of an investment project. Corporate Finance 90 This method allows for more realistic and integrated forecasting. For instance, if you identify the price of oil as a strategic variable—because it affects the energy costs in your production—you may be particularly concerned about potential increases in oil or gas prices. Starting from that key variable, you analyse how changes in the oil price might affect other variables such as production costs, sales prices, and profit margins. Also, in contrast to sensitivity analysis, scenario analysis does not generally focus on the best and worst outcomes. Instead it tries to identify how a project would be affected by possible major, mutually consistent changes in a project’s environment. By doing so, you can develop different comprehensive scenarios—both optimistic and pessimistic— that reflect these interdependencies and allow for the calculation of corresponding NPVs. Limitations to such analysis The analyst needs to reduce an infinite number of possible future scenarios to no more than two or three scenarios that capture the main uncertainties surrounding the project. But constructing even a limited number of scenarios and identifying their effects can soak up a lot of analyst time. Not surprisingly, formal scenario analysis tends to be reserved for major projects or for possible strategies for the entire business. Break-Even Analysis and Operating Leverage Sometimes, investment proposals and capital budgeting decisions are evaluated using break-even analysis. The break-even analysis asks the question how bad things can get before the project becomes a loser. Break-even analysis involves examining revenues and costs to determine the sales volume at which total revenues equal total costs. From that point onward, the firm begins to generate profits. A variation of break-even analysis focuses on financial return In this case, the analysis aims to identify the quantity of output at which the Net Present Value (NPV) equals zero. In other words, the discounted cash flows from the project exactly match the initial investment. From that point onward, the NPV becomes positive, meaning the project is financially viable and worthwhile. Break-even points are most often calculated in terms of sales, but they can equally well be calculated for other variables. This table shows percentage change in the estimated value of each variable that produces an NPV of zero. Operating Leverage Operating leverage builds on the idea that any costs that are fixed do not decline along with sales, and, therefore, any shortfall in sales has a greater impact on profitability. Of course, a high proportion of fixed costs is not all bad. The firm whose costs are largely fixed fares poorly when demand is low but makes a killing during a boom. A business with high fixed costs is said to have high operating leverage. Operating leverage is usually defined in terms of accounting profits rather than cash flows and is measured by the percentage change in profits for each 1% change in sales h f Corporate Finance 91 so if that means that A increase in a project’s revenues would result in a rise in profits. Real Options and the Value of Flexibility After having invested in a new project mangers see the state of it. If things go well, the project may be expanded; if they go badly, the project may be cut back or abandoned altogether. Projects that can be modified in these ways are more valuable than those that do not provide such flexibility. The more uncertain the outlook, the more valuable this flexibility becomes. Options to modify projects are known as real options. Real options give the firm flexibility to adapt and make decisions that can enhance the project's NPV or mitigate potential losses The Option to Expand Suppose you estimate a certain level of market demand for a new product. However, you also believe there is a realistic chance that actual demand could exceed your forecasts. If you have secured an option to expand production, you will be able to meet this higher demand. If no such option is in place, the firm may miss out on the opportunity to capitalise on the increased demand. For instance, you might negotiate a contract with a supplier that fixes the purchase price of additional raw materials or components in advance. This contract would obligate the supplier to provide extra goods at a pre-agreed price, but only if you choose to exercise that option—allowing you to scale up production efficiently and without delay. Some investments are more valuable because they give a company flexibility for the future. For instance: Extra space in a factory makes it cheaper to expand later. Building wider bridges during highway construction makes future road expansion easier. Leaving room on oil platforms allows for later upgrades if prices make it worthwhile. The Option to Abandon If things go wrong during the life of a project—such as a sharp decline in market demand or falling prices for the goods you produce—you may be forced to terminate the project earlier than originally planned. In such cases, having the option to abandon the project can help limit financial losses. Tangible assets are usually easier to sell than intangible ones. For example, if you own a production plant that can be sold on the secondary market, the proceeds from that sale represent a residual value. This cash inflow can be used to partially offset the shortfall caused by lower-than-expected cash flows from the project. Real estate, airplanes, trucks, and certain machine tools are likely to be relatively easy to sell On the other hand, the knowledge accumulated by a software company’s research and development program is a specialised intangible asset and probably would not have significant abandonment value. Some assets, such as old mattresses, even have negative abandonment value; you have to pay to get rid of them. It is costly to decommission nuclear power plants or to reclaim land that has been strip-mined. Production Options Market demand is inherently variable—not only in terms of quantity but also quality and consumer preferences. If your investment includes machinery or a production plant that is flexible and capable of producing different versions or variations of a product, you are better positioned to respond to these changing market demands over the life of the project. DOL = percetage change in sales percentage change in profits DOL = 4.5% 1% 4.5% Corporate Finance 92 Conversely, if the production system is rigid and inflexible, the company may be unable to adapt to shifts in demand, which can negatively impact revenues and overall project performance. Having a production option allows you to adapt output—whether in quantity, quality, or product type —based on evolving market conditions. In just the same way, it may be worth paying up front for the flexibility to vary the inputs. Timing Options The fact that a project has a positive NPV does not mean that it is best undertaken now. It might be even more valuable to delay. Another key real option is the timing option, which refers to the flexibility to decide when to undertake an investment—now or later Timing decisions are often based on the availability and quality of information. The idea behind the timing option is that the longer you wait, the more information you can gather This helps reduce uncertainty and allows you to improve the accuracy of your forecasts. In other words, delaying investment can result in better decision-making because your inputs— such as demand, costs, and market trends—become clearer. However, there is a trade-off. If you wait too long, competitors might act before you, capturing market share and reducing your project's potential. Decision Trees Decision trees are commonly used to describe the real options embedded in capital investment projects. A decision tree is a diagrammatic representation—like a branching tree—that maps out a series of decisions and possible outcomes over the life of a project. Decision trees can help to illustrate project risk and the effect of future decisions on project cash flows. At each decision point, the manager must choose a course of action, with each branch representing a possible decision or event. These decisions are influenced by future uncertainties and the potential outcomes of events such as market responses, cost changes, or technological shifts One major advantage of using decision trees is that they force managers to identify and focus on the key variables that can create or destroy value, not only for the project but for the firm as a whole. This structured approach improves strategic thinking by making risks and choices more explicit. Corporate Finance 93 The trouble with decision trees is that they get so complex so quickly. In reality, at any given point in time, the number of possible outcomes can be very large—and some of them may arise from unexpected events that were initially considered unlikely or even impossible. They should be judged not on their comprehensiveness but on whether they show the most important links between today’s and tomorrow’s decisions. Efficient Markets and Behavioural Finance (