# Chapter 1

) Corporate finance deals with the financial decisions and policies of a firm. The term "corporate" refers to firms and enterprises, while "finance" pertains to financial decision-making. The main financial decisions of a firm fall into three categories: Investment Decisions Investment decisions involve the allocation of a firm's financial resources. Corporations invest in real assets (tangible and intangible), which generate income. This includes purchasing products, raw materials, equipment, and machinery, income from patent, copyright, trademarks, R&D, etc. choosing projects, assets, or ventures that can generate future growth and profitability. as well as covering expenses such as wages, advertising, and sales. Essentially, any use of capital within a firm qualifies as an investment decision. A financial manager employs financial resources with the expectation of recovering them, along with an additional return, to generate value for the firm. Financial managers know (or quickly learn) that cash returns are not guaranteed. An investment could be a smashing success or a dismal failure. The real value of a company stems from its investment decisions—what makes a company great is what it does (its investment decisions) rather than how it pays for it (its financing decisions). These decisions matter more on the upside because they determine how well a firm can expand, innovate, and create value for shareholders. A good investment decision can lead to high returns, competitive advantages, and long-term success. Financing Decisions The financing decision includes not just raising cash today but also meeting its obligations to banks, bondholders, and shareholders that have contributed financing in the past. Financing decisions mainly focus on how a firm raises the money needed for investments. The firm can obtain funds through: Corporate Finance 1 Equity: Financial resources provided by shareholders, i.e., the owners of the firm. The shareholders are equity investors, who contribute equity financing. Debt: Borrowed funds from banks, bondholders, or other financial institutions. The choice between debt and equity financing is called the capital structure decision. Capital refers to the firm’s sources of long-term financing. Corporations raise equity financing in two ways. First, they can issue new shares of stock The investors who buy the new shares put up cash in exchange for a fraction of the corporation’s future cash flow and profits. Second, the corporation can take the cash flow generated by its existing assets and reinvest that cash in new assets. In this case the corporation is reinvesting on behalf of existing shareholders. Whenever a manager reinvests cash, she’s choosing not to pay out that cash to shareholders— she’s effectively raising money from shareholders. When a corporation does not reinvest all of the clash flow generated it existing asset, it may hold the cash in reserve for future investment, or it may pay the cash back to its shareholders. The decision to pay dividends or repurchase shares is called the pay-out decision. Financial decisions relate to capital structure, debt management, and liquidity—essentially, how a company funds its investments and manages financial risk. These decisions are particularly important on the downside because they determine how well a company can survive during downturns, crises, or periods of financial distress. Pay-out Decisions Once a financial manager has invested money in the firm and generated returns—either by utilising assets or selling products and services—the next step is to distribute the recovered funds. These funds must first be used to repay debt holders, as the firm is legally obligated to return their capital. However, the distribution of income to shareholders is a discretionary financial decision. The amount returned to shareholders depends on a decision made either by the shareholders themselves or by the board of directors, depending on the legal system in place. The different types of firms Regardless of a firm's characteristics, the principles of corporate finance apply to all businesses. The definition and concepts of corporate finance are relevant to any type of company, regardless of size or industry. Limited Liability Company (LLC) A limited liability company is a business structure in which the owners (shareholders) are only responsible for the firm's debts up to the amount they have invested. This means that if the firm's debts exceed the invested capital, shareholders cannot be required to cover the remaining liabilities with their personal assets. Unlimited Liability Company In contrast, an unlimited liability company is a business structure where owners face a higher financial risk. If the company encounters financial distress, shareholders are liable not only for the amount they have invested but also for any outstanding debts beyond that. In such cases, they may be required to use their personal assets to cover the firm's liabilities. What Is a Corporation? A corporation is a legal entity. In the view of the law, it is a legal person that is owned by its shareholders. As a legal person, the corporation can make contracts, carry on a business, borrow or lend money, and sue or be sued. It must also pay taxes. Can buy another corporation. A corporation’s board of directors. Corporate Finance 2 Corporations are governed by a board of directors, which is elected by shareholders to represent their interests. The board is responsible for making major financial decisions, such as mergers and acquisitions, and for amending the company's statutory documents. Additionally, the board of directors plays a crucial role in overseeing top management. It has the authority to: Hire and dismiss senior executives Supervise and control managerial activities Reward or penalise managers based on their performance A corporation is owned by its shareholders but is legally distinct from them. Therefore the shareholders have limited liability, which means that they cannot be held personally responsible for the corporation’s debts. Shareholders can lose their entire investment in a corporation, but no more. When a corporation is first established, its shares may be privately held by a small group of investors, such as the company’s managers and a few backers. In this case, the shares are not publicly traded and the company is closely held. Eventually, when the firm grows and new shares are issued to raise additional capital, its shares are traded in public markets such as the New York Stock Exchange or Hong Kong Stock Exchange. These corporations are known as public companies. A large public corporation may have millions of shareholders, who own the business but cannot possibly manage or control it directly. This separation of ownership and control gives corporations permanence. Even if managers quit or are dismissed and replaced, the corporation survives. Today’s shareholders can sell all their shares to new investors without disrupting the operations of the business. The Role of the Financial Manager The financial manager stands between the firm and outside investors. On the one hand, the financial manager helps manage the firm’s operations, particularly by helping to make good investment decisions. On the other hand, the financial manager deals with investors—not just with shareholders but also with financial institutions such as banks and with financial markets such as the London Stock Exchange . The figure traces how money flows from investors to the corporation and back to investors again The flow starts when cash is raised from investors (arrow 1 in the figure). The financial manager sells financial assets to raise funds. This includes issuing shares, bonds, and signing bank contracts when the firm borrows money from financial institutions. Through the sale of these financial assets, the financial manager gathers the necessary capital for investment. Funds are then used to pay for the real assets needed for the corporation’s business (arrow 2). Corporate Finance 3 allocates the collected funds for investments. These investments can be made in both tangible and intangible assets. Later, as the business operates, the assets produce cash inflows (arrow 3). Once investments are made, they become liquid through the sale of products and services generated by those tangible and intangible assets. After the firm makes divestments through sales, the financial manager collects the proceeds. That cash is either reinvested (arrow 4a) or returned to the investors who furnished the money in the first place (arrow 4b). Shareholders Want Managers to Maximise Market Value Major corporations may have millions of shareholders. Authority has to be delegated to professional managers, just as residents delegate the running of a city to the mayor. Every investor wants the financial manager to increase shareholder wealth. Shareholders have different interests but fortunately, for managers, there is a natural financial objective on which most shareholders can agree despite their differences: Maximise the current market value of shareholders’ investment in the firm. A smart and effective manager makes decisions that increase the current market value of the company’s shares. This increased market value can then be put to whatever purposes the shareholders want, inter alia, sell their shares or retain their entire investment in the firm. In a well-functioning financial market, is it a problem if a shareholder receives more or less than they initially expected? The answer depends on how efficiently financial markets operate If a shareholder receives more money than anticipated, there is no issue. They can simply reinvest the extra funds in the financial markets, selecting investments that align with their risk tolerance and desired return. In this case, the market provides alternative opportunities for investors to manage their excess returns efficiently. If a shareholder receives less than they expected, they have options as well. They can borrow money from financial markets or banks to cover the shortfall. Over time, they may recover their position by selling shares in the company, assuming that the financial manager has invested wisely and increased the firm's value. If financial management has made sound investment decisions, the company's share price should appreciate, allowing the shareholder to sell their shares at a profit and repay their debt. These examples illustrate that, in an efficient market, fluctuations in shareholder returns and preferences are not a fundamental problem. Financial markets allow shareholders to transport savings across time, by borrowing money or selling shares (if they wish to consume today) or lending money or buying more shares (if they prefer to consume in the future). Financial markets give investors the flexibility to manage their own savings and investment plans, leaving the corporation’s financial managers with only one task: to increase market value and hence shareholder wealth. Profit maximisation is not a well-defined financial objective for at least two reasons: Which year’s profits? A corporation may be able to increase current profits by cutting R&D, but that may result in lower profits in the future. What about risk? If a project will increase the company’s profits but also make it riskier, it is not clear that the manager should take it. Should Managers Maximise Shareholder Wealth? One challenge of maximising the “current” market value leads managers to be short-ermist—that is, focus on short-term profits by reducing investment or cutting wages. A second criticism is that it’s narrowly focused on shareholders at the expense of stakeholders. Corporate Finance 4 A single-minded focus on shareholders might cause managers to price-gouge customers, overwork employees, or pollute the environment in pursuit of shareholder wealth. However, these criticisms are not fully warranted Current shareholder wealth depends on all future cash flows generated by a company, not just current cash flows. A company developing renewable energy may be improving current shareholder wealth, even if the project is not profitable for 20 years. A company failing to train its workforce may be destroying shareholder value, even though the cost savings will boost short-term profits. Moving to the latter, it is not true that a focus on enriching the shareholders means that managers must act as greedy mercenaries riding roughshod over the weak and helpless. Investing in stakeholders often benefits shareholders, and any financial manager who fails to take these effects into account is failing at her job. Profitable firms are those with satisfied customers and loyal employees; firms with dissatisfied customers and a disgruntled workforce will probably end up with declining profits and a low stock price. Moreover, according to the shareholder value maximisation approach, by focusing on maximising shareholder wealth, a firm will inherently also maximise the value and satisfaction of all other stakeholders. In this view, profit is seen as a residual value. Only once all other stakeholders have been compensated —whether through wages, payments, services, or taxes—does the firm realise its profit. If a company generates a profit, it indicates that all stakeholders have been satisfied. It is important to acknowledge that the two preceding criticisms may sometimes be valid. Starting with the short-termism critique, We’ve been assuming that the stock market is efficient, meaning that a company's share price reflects all its future cash flows. But what if the stock market is short-sighted and ignores long-term cash flows? In that case, a company’s market value (stock price) wouldn’t truly reflect its shareholder value (overall worth to investors). This could lead to problems: A company making a smart, long-term investment might see its stock price drop unfairly. If managers fear this reaction, they might avoid good investments, even if those investments would benefit shareholders in the long run. A solution is to pay the manager in long-term shares, so that she is less concerned with the shortterm stock price. Though, companies can also be knocked off course by recessions, by changes in commodity prices, interest rates and exchange rates, or by adverse political developments. Let’s move to the second criticism, Unfortunately, some investments in stakeholders won’t fully feed back into shareholder value, even in the long term. If a company invests billions in reducing its greenhouse gas emissions, the benefits are enjoyed by many, but the company’s own share of the gains may be small. The consequences that companies exert on society, but don’t feed back into their profits, are known as externalities. A company that’s focused on shareholder wealth will ignore externalities and thus may turn down certain investments in stakeholders. As a result, managers’ objectives may need to be broadened for them to fully take stakeholder interests into account. The shareholder versus the stakeholder approach Corporate Finance 5 Traditionally, the correct goal for a company has been to maximise shareholder value. However, in recent years, alternative perspectives have gained prominence. Academics and professionals have recognised that focusing solely on shareholder value may not always align with the broader interests of all stakeholders. Such as employees, customers, suppliers, and society as a whole. This has led to the rise of Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) criteria as a framework for corporate decision-making. What is ESG? Environmental: A company’s impact on the environment, including sustainability practices and carbon footprint. Social: The company’s relationships with employees, customers, and communities. Governance: The internal systems and processes ensuring ethical business practices, transparency, and accountability. Under the ESG framework, the goal of a company extends beyond maximising shareholder value to satisfying the interests of society as a whole. The Investment Trade-Off Suppose the corporation has a proposed investment in a real asset and enough cash on hand to finance it. If the corporation doesn’t invest, it can instead pay out the cash to shareholders—say, as an extra dividend. Assume that the financial manager is acting in the interests of the corporation’s owners, its shareholders. What do these shareholders want the financial manager to do? The answer depends on the project’s rate of return versus the rate of return that the shareholders can earn by investing in financial markets. Let’s say BMW is considering launching a new electric car in 2025. The company has already set aside cash for the project, but it has two choices: go ahead with the launch or cancel it and instead give the cash to shareholders as a pay-out. Now, assume that investing in the overall European stock market offers an expected return of per year. If BMW’s new electric car project is expected to generate a higher return—say, , then shareholders would prefer BMW to keep the cash and invest in the new model. If the project is expected to generate only , then shareholders would be better off getting the cash and investing it elsewhere. In that case, BMW’s financial manager should reject the project. Opportunity Cost of capital In our example, the minimum acceptable rate of return on BMW’s new car is . This minimum rate of return is called the opportunity cost of capital because it depends on the investment opportunities available to investors in financial markets. The opportunity cost of capital refers to the minimum rate of return that shareholders require when investing in a project. This is the return they could expect to earn from the best alternative investment 10% 20% 5% 10% Corporate Finance 6 with similar risk. If a project’s return exceeds this minimum required rate, it indicates that the financial manager has created value for shareholders by offering a return higher than what shareholders could obtain elsewhere. Corporations increase value by accepting all investment projects that earn more than the opportunity cost of capital. For this reason, the cost of capital is also known as the hurdle rate, because a project’s return must be higher than this hurdle for it to create value for shareholders. If the firm can no longer offer returns that meet or exceed the opportunity cost of capital, shareholders should be given the option to invest elsewhere, where they can earn a higher return. That the hurdle rate is an opportunity cost of investing elsewhere should make it clear that the minimum required return for a project depends entirely on external factors—the rates of return that shareholders could obtain elsewhere. Managers look to the financial markets to measure the opportunity cost of capital for the firm’s investment projects. They can observe the opportunity cost of capital for safe investments by looking up current interest rates on safe debt securities. For risky investments, the opportunity cost of capital has to be estimated. A key question for financial managers is whether they are truly creating value for shareholders. If the company is publicly listed, share prices offer a more objective and reliable measure. In a well-functioning financial market, share prices reflect the perceived value of a company. If the company is a high-quality firm, investors will be willing to purchase its shares, driving up the price. This increase in share price is often interpreted as a sign that the financial manager has created value for shareholders. Conversely, if the market perceives value destruction, investors may sell their shares, causing the share price to decline. Therefore, share prices can be a useful indicator of the level of value that financial managers are creating for shareholders. Otherwise, if the firm is not quoted, we can consider the increase in shareholder value as the difference in equity over time. Specifically, it is calculated as the difference in equity between two periods, such as the equity in 2021 minus the equity in 2020. Limitations of Share Prices However, there are drawbacks to using share prices as the sole measure of value creation. Sometimes, even if a financial manager is executing solid financial decisions, share prices may fall due to external factors unrelated to the company’s performance. For example, during a bearish market—where overall market conditions are poor—share prices across the board tend to decline, regardless of individual company performance. On the other hand, a financial manager might be ineffective, but share prices can still rise during a bullish market. In this case, overall positive market conditions or speculative trends may drive up share prices, regardless of the company's internal performance or the quality of its financial management. Therefore, while share prices are a valuable tool for measuring shareholder value creation, they don’t always perfectly reflect the actual performance of a firm or the effectiveness of its financial managers. bank loans A low interest rate on a loan doesn’t define your project’s opportunity cost of capital. That low rate may reflect your business’s financial health, not the risk of the new investment. You could get the loan regardless of whether you take on the project, so it’s not specific to the project’s risk. Agency Problems and Corporate Governance Corporate Finance 7 A key issue in corporate finance is the potential conflict of interest between managers and shareholders. Managers are entrusted with making decisions that should benefit shareholders, but in some cases, they may act in their own self-interest instead. Conflicts between shareholders’ and managers’ objectives create agency problems. Agency problems arise when agents work for principals. The shareholders are the principals; the managers are their agents. Agency costs are incurred when (1) managers do not attempt to maximise firm value and (2) shareholders incur costs to monitor the managers and constrain their actions. Errors of omission (failing to take good actions, such as launching a new product or closing down an unprofitable division) are often even more serious than errors of commission (undertaking bad actions). Good systems of governance ensure that managers’ hearts are close to shareholders’ pockets. This means well-designed incentives for managers, standards for accounting and disclosure to investors, requirements for boards of directors, and legal sanctions for self-dealing by management. When scandals happen, we say that corporate governance has broken down. When corporations compete effectively and ethically to deliver value to shareholders, we conclude that governance is working properly. Corporate Finance’s recurring themes Corporate finance is all about maximising shareholder value. Maximising shareholder value involves considering the long-term consequences of all decisions, including their effects on stakeholders such as customers, employees, and the environment. Maximising the current stock price does not involve focusing on short-term profits, and increasing shareholder value does not involve price gouging customers, overworking employees, or polluting the environment. In a forward-looking market, even the short-term share price takes these long-term effects into account. Moreover, managers have objectives other than shareholder value. The opportunity cost of capital sets the standard for investment decisions. A safe dollar is worth more than a risky dollar Good governance matters. Financial Analysis (