# Chapter 2

) Present values are used to determine the price of virtually all investments, including stocks, bonds, and even real estate. The best way to explain the concept of present value is to start with another concept: the future value of an investment. How to Calculate Future and Present Values Calculating Future Values The future value of the sum you invest today is the amount you can expect to obtain in the future, given an expected rate of return or interest. Suppose you invest in a bank account that offers a return of a year. In the first year, you will earn a return of and the value of your investment will grow from its present value (PV) of to : By investing, you give up the opportunity to spend today, but you gain the opportunity to spend next year. In the second year, your investment will grow to: NFA (current year) = NFA (previous year) + Investment in fixed assets − Depre 275 39.8 24.8 275 + 39.8 − 24.8 = 290 620.4 620.4 620.4 517 €607.8 €517.8 607.8 − 90.0 17% 47% €100 r = 7% 0.07 × €100 = €7 €100 €107 Value of investment after 1 year = present value × (1 + r) = €100 × 1.07 = €107 €100 €107 2 Corporate Finance 40 Notice that in the second year you earn interest on both your initial investment ( ) and the previous year’s interest ( ). Thus your wealth grows at a compound rate and the interest that you earn is called compound interest. In other words, you take into account that at the end of each interest period, the sum generated also generates interest. So, the value of the sum after 10 years with compound interest is calculated as raised to the power of , where is the number of periods. In other words, for each period. Each period you multiply the sum that you obtain in the previous period. For any interest rate , the general formula for future value is: The formula for future value answers the following question: How much money will I have in the future by investing a specific amount of money today at a specific rate of interest? The higher the interest rate, the faster your savings will grow. A few percentage points added to the interest rate can do wonders for your future wealth. By the end of 20 years, invested at invested at will grow to . If it is invested at , it will grow to . 2.1 Self-Test 📝 Janet Shih invests at a compound interest rate of . how much will her investment be worth at the end of five years? 📝 If she keeps her money invested for an additional sixth year, how much interest will she earn in that final year? Calculating Present Values €107 × 1.07 = €100 × 1.07 = 2 €114.49 €7 €7.49 €100 × (1 + r) t t t €100 × (1 + r) × (1 + r) × (1 + r)… r Future value = present value × (1 + r) t €100 5% €100 × (1.05) 20 = €265.33 10% €100 × (1.10) 20 = €672.75 €3, 200 8% 3200 × (1.08) = 5 4701.76 4701.76 × 0.08 = 376.32 Corporate Finance 41 The question to ask now is how much you need to invest today to produce at the end of the second year. In other words, what is the present value (PV) of the payoff? We just run the future-value calculation in reverse and divide the future payoff by : To determine the present value of this future sum, you discount the future value by the specific rate of interest. In general, suppose that you will receive a cash flow of euros at the end of year . The present value of this future payment is The rate, , in the formula is called the discount rate, and the present value is the discounted value of the cash flow, . Sometime, instead of dividing the future payment by , you can equally well multiply the payment by . The expression is called the discount factor. It measures the present value of one euro received at the end of year . Example With an interest rate of the two-year discount factor is Investors are willing to pay today for delivery of at the end of two years. If each euro received in year 2 is worth today, then the present value of your payment of in year 2 must be The longer you have to wait for your money, the lower its present value. At an interest rate of , a payment of in year 20 is worth today €114.49 €114.49 (1.07) 2 Present value = PV = = (1.07) 2 €114.49 €100 Ct t Present value = PV = (1 + r) t Ct r Ct (1 + r) t (1+r) t 1 (1+r) t 1 t 7% DF2 = = (1.07) 2 1 0.8734 €0.8734 €1 €0.8734 €114.49 Present value = DF2 × C2 Present value = 0.8734 × 114.49 = €100 5% €100 €37.69 PV = = (1 + 0.05) 20 100 37.69 Corporate Finance 42 If the interest rate increases to , the present value of the future payment falls by about to . Present Value (PV) represents the value of future cash flows expressed in today’s money. It accounts for the time value of money, meaning that a dollar today is worth more than a dollar in the future due to factors like inflation and investment opportunities. Valuing an Investment Opportunity As the manager of a small company, you’re considering building an office block costing . You expect to sell the building for next year, with the sale price being a guaranteed outcome. Your choices are You can invest in the project or pay cash out to the shareholders, who can invest on their own. We assume that they can earn a profit by investing for one year in safe assets (ECB Euro-denominated bonds). What is the opportunity cost of capital for the office investment? The answer is : That’s the rate of return that your company’s shareholders could get by investing on their own in risk free government debt. How much is the investment worth and how much will it add to your shareholders’ wealth? The project produces a cash flow at the end of one year. To find its present value we discount that cash flow by the opportunity cost of capital: If you sell the office building immediately after construction, its value today would be the present value (PV) of the future payment, which is at a return. That is what investors in the financial markets would need to pay to get the same future payoff. Thus, If is the opportunity cost of capital, you will find someone in the market willing to buy this investment at this price, expecting a return. If you tried to sell it for more than , there would be no takers because the property would then offer a lower rate of return than the available on government securities. You could always sell your property for less, but why sell for less than the market is willing to pay? The present value is the only feasible price that satisfies both buyer and seller. Therefore, the present value of the property is also its market price. To sum up, If you buy at a price lower than the present value, you're the lucky one. You’ll obtain more than the minimum required return because, if you pay less for the same future amount, your rate 10% 60% €14.86 PV = = (1 + 0.1) 20 100 14.86 €700, 000 €800, 000 7% 7% PV = = 1.07 800, 000 €747, 664 €800, 000 €747, 664 7% 7% 7% €747, 664 7% €747, 664 Corporate Finance 43 of return increases. If you pay more, it’s not a good deal for you because you’ll earn less than the expected return. You see the inverse relationship between the price (PV) and the rate of return ( ). The less you pay, the higher the rate of return ( ) will be. The more you pay, the lower the rate of return ( ) will be. It's an inverse relationship. Net Present Value The project costs , so the net present value (NPV) is . Net present value equals present value minus the required investment: In other words, the office development is worth more than it costs. It makes a net contribution to shareholder value and increases their wealth. Therefore, the formula for calculating the NPV of a project (investment), when there is only a cash outflow (the money which is invested) and a cash inflow ( ) is: Remember that , the cash flow at time (that is, today) is usually a negative number. In other words, is an investment and therefore a cash outflow. Risk and Present Value In reality, you can’t be certain about the resale value. represents your best guess, but it’s not a sure thing. If the cash flows are uncertain, your calculation of NPV is wrong. Investors could achieve a certain next year by buying worth of EU bonds. Here we can invoke a second basic financial principle: A safe dollar is worth more than a risky dollar. The riskier the venture, the less that they will be prepared to pay and the higher the return that they will demand. You still need to discount the payoff by the opportunity cost of capital. But now the cash flow that you discount is the expected cash flow and the opportunity cost of capital is now the rate of return available in financial markets on investments of similar risk to your project. In a risky situation, the opportunity cost of capital is higher because the investment carries more uncertainty. A wise investor will not accept the same rate of return for investments with different levels of risk. The higher the risk, the higher the return expected. This means there is a direct relationship: as risk increases, so does the expected return, and consequently, the opportunity cost of capital also increases. Suppose you believe that investing in the office building is as risky as investment in the stock market and that stocks are expected to provide a return. Then is the opportunity cost of capital r r r €700, 000 €47, 664 NPV = PV − investment = 747, 664 − 700, 000 = €47, 664 C1 NPV = C0 + (1 + r) C1 C0 0 C0 €800, 000 €800, 000 €747, 664 12% 12% Corporate Finance 44 for your project. Now recompute NPV with : The office building still makes a net contribution to value, but the increase in your wealth is smaller than in our first calculation. The value of the office building depends, therefore, on the timing of the cash flows and their risk. The payoff would be worth if you could get it today. If the office building is as risk-free as government securities, the delay in the cash flow reduces value by to . If the building is as risky as investment in the stock market, then the risk reduces value by a further to In other words, the term —increases as time passes or as the risk increases, reducing the present value of the cash flow. Present Values and Rates of Return We can state our investment decision in another way: Your real estate venture is worth undertaking because its rate of return exceeds the opportunity cost of capital. The rate of return is simply the profit as a proportion of the initial outlay: The cost of capital is once again the return foregone by not investing in financial markets. If the office building is as risky as investing in the stock market, the return foregone is . Since the return on the office building exceeds the opportunity cost, you should go ahead with the project. We can justify the investment in the office building by either one of the following two rules: Net present value rule. Accept investments that have positive net present values. Rate of return rule. Accept investments that offer rates of return in excess of their opportunity costs of capital. Calculating Present Values When There Are Multiple Cash Flows One of the nice things about present values is that they are all expressed in current euros—so you can add them up. In other words, the present value of cash flow is equal to the present value of cash flow plus the present value of cash flow . Suppose that you wish to value a stream of cash flows extending over a number of years. Our rule for adding present values tells us that the total present value is: This is called the discounted cash flow (or DCF) formula. To find the net present value (NPV) we add the (usually negative) initial cash flow: r = 0.12 PV = = 1.12 800, 000 €714, 286 NPV = PV − 700, 000 = €14, 286 €800, 000 €800, 000 €52, 336 €747, 664 €33, 378 €714, 286 (1 + r) t Return = investment profit Return = = 700, 000 800, 000 − 700, 000 0.143 = 14.3% 12% 14.3% 12% (A + B) A B PV = + 1 + r C1 + (1 + r) 2 C2 + (1 + r) 3 C3 ⋯ + (1 + r)T CT PV = t=1 ∑ T (1 + r)T CT Corporate Finance 45 Thus, in order to analyse a proposed, for example, million investment in a new venture, these are the following steps First, forecast the cash flows generated by project X over its economic life. Second, determine the appropriate opportunity cost of capital ( ). This should reflect both the time value of money and the risk involved in project X. Third, use this opportunity cost of capital to discount the project’s future cash flows. We already know that The sum of the discounted cash flows is called present value (PV). Fourth, calculate net present value (NPV) by subtracting the million investment from PV. How to Value Perpetuities and Annuities How to Value Perpetuities A perpetuity is an investment that pays the same cash flow every year in perpetuity, with the first cash flow arising one year from now. Let be the cash flow paid out each year. The annual rate of return on a perpetuity is equal to the promised annual payment divided by the present value: So, the present value of a perpetuity is The perpetuity formula tells us the value of a regular stream of payments starting one period from now. If the cash flow starts in year , then the formula gives you a present value as of year . In other words, the formula gives you the value of the perpetuity one year before the first cash flow arises. For example, a billion endowment today is enough to provide billion each year as long as the first payment arises in one year’s time. A perpetuity that starts immediately is known as a perpetuity due In general, to find the present value of a perpetuity due, we simply add on the first year’s cash flow to a regular perpetuity—that is, So, a perpetuity due is worth times as much as a regular perpetuity. In the previous example, if you want the payments to start immediately, you’ll need an extra billion to cover the first payment, for a total of billion. delayed perpetuities Sometimes you may need to calculate the value of a perpetuity that does not start to make payments for several years To find the today’s value of a delayed perpetuity, we need to discount its value by with being the number of years of the delayed. NPV = C0 + t=1 ∑ T (1 + r) t Ct €1 r €1 C r = PV C PV of perpetuity = r C t + 1 t €10 €1 PV of perpetuity = = 0.1 €1 billion €10 billion PV = C + = r C (1 + r C r) (1 + r) €1 €11 PV = × r C (1 + r) t 1 (1 + r) t t Corporate Finance 46 2.5 Self-Test 📝 You have planted a money tree that is expected to produce at the end of each year in perpetuity starting one year from now. If the interest rate is , what is the present value of the money tree? 📝 Now you realize that the tree will not start to bear fruit until the end of year 3. How does this change your calculation of the tree’s value? The tree will be worth at the end of year 2 (remember that the perpetuity formula gives a valuation one year before the first payment) , and therefore, its present value is How to Value Annuities An annuity is an asset that pays a fixed sum each year for a specified number of years (mortgages, interest payments of most bonds). You can always value an annuity by calculating the value of each cash flow and finding the total. However, it is often quicker to use a simple formula which states that an annuity is equivalent to the difference between an regular and a delayed perpetuity: The expression in brackets is the -year annuity factor. It shows the present value of a year for each of years. When is infinite, the annuity and perpetuity formulas are identical. example 📝 Most leasing plans call for a level stream of payments. Suppose that Omega Airlines wishes to lease a new airliner for five years at a cost of million a year, payable at the end of each year, starting one year from now. What is the present value of these payments? if the discount rate is , the present value of these payments is . €8, 000 7% PV = = 0.07 €8, 000 €114, 286 (8, 000/0.07) × 0.07 €8, 000 = 1.07 2 1 €99, 822 PV of t-year annuity = C [ − r 1 r(1 + r) t 1 ] t €1 t t €5 7% €20, 501 Corporate Finance 47 The annuity formula, however, is generally quicker Valuing Annuities Due A level stream of payments starting immediately is called an annuity due An annuity due is worth times the value of an ordinary annuity. In the previous example, if we discount each cash flow by one less year, the present value is increased by the multiple . In the case of the lease, the present value of the payments becomes million example 2 📝 Loans that involve a series of level payments are known as amortising loans. “Amortising” means that part of the regular payment is used to pay interest on the loan and part is used to pay off or amortise the loan. Suppose that you take out a four-year loan of . The bank requires you to repay the loan evenly over the four years. It must therefore set the four annual payments so that they have a present value of . is Suppose that the interest rate is 10% a year. Then then At the end of the first year, the interest charge is of , or . So of the first payment is absorbed by interest, and the remaining is used to reduce the loan balance to . PV = 5 [ − 0.07 1 0.07(1.07) 5 1 ] PV = 5 × 4, 1002 = €20, 501 (1 + r) PV of t-year annuity due = C [ − (1 + r 1 r(1 + r) t 1 ] r) (1 + r) 20.501 × (1 + r) = 20.501 × 1.07 = €21.94 €1, 000 €1, 000 PV PV = annual loan paymnet × 4 − year annuity factor = €1, 000 4 − year annuity factor = [ − = 0.10 1 0.10(1.10) 4 1 ] 3.170 Annual loan payment = = 3.170 1, 000 €315.47 10% €1, 000 €100 €100 €215.47 €784.53 Corporate Finance 48 Future Value of an Annuity Sometimes you need to calculate the future value of a level stream of payments. So to calculate the future value we just need to multiply the present value by . How to Value Growing Perpetuities and Annuities Growing Perpetuities You often need to value a stream of cash flows that grow at a constant rate. If we call the growth rate in costs , we can write down the present value of this stream of cash flows as follows: If we assume is greater than , then we can simplify it to How much do I need to invest today to receive a series of payments that grow at a constant rate forever? For the formula to be valid, must be greater than . Why is that? The reason is simple: we need a positive present value because the present value represents the price you need to pay to obtain a future stream of infinite cash flows. If the price (present value) is negative, it doesn’t make sense. A negative present value would mean you’re paying less than the future cash flows you will receive, which implies that the counterparty is paying you to invest. This scenario is meaningless from a financial point of view. 2.8 Self-Test 📝 At the end of the next year, General Supplies is expected to pay a dividend of a share. You expect the dividend to grow thereafter by a year in perpetuity. If investors demand a return of on the stock, what is its present value? Growing Annuities In October 2018, a South Carolina woman won a record billion in the Mega Millions lottery. However, the prize was paid in 30 annual instalments, starting at million in the first year, with each subsequent payment increasing by . The final payment would be million. Although the total prize was billion, the winner had to wait for these payments over time. Given an interest rate of , the billion prize wasn’t actually worth that much in present value. (1 + r) t future value annuity = C [ − (1 + r 1 r(1 + r) t 1 ] r) t = C r (1 + r) − 1 t g PV = + 1 + r C1 + (1 + r) 2 C1(1 + g) + (1 + r) 3 C1(1 + g) 2 … r g PV of growing perpetuity = r − g C1 r g €4 4% 8% PV = = 0.08 − 0.04 €4 €100 €1.54 €23.18 5% €95.41 51.54 3.4% €1.54 Corporate Finance 49 To calculate the present value of a growing annuity and find the true value of the prize today, we use this formula How much do I need to invest today to receive a series of payments that grow at a constant rate for a fixed number of years? In the case of our lottery, the present value of the growing stream of payments is If the total prize money was paid out immediately, it would be worth billion. Paying out this money over the next 29 years reduces the value of the prize to about . Making Investment Decisions with the Net Present Value Rule (