Business Information Systems Bachelor's degree in Digital Economics and Business Prof. Alex Mircoli Written exam - 11/06/2024 1. (10 points) Describe the decision tree algorithm 2. (8 points) Given the following relations: MUSICIAN(ssn, first_name, last_name, address, birthdate) PLAYS(musician, instrument) INSTRUMENT(name, type) and the following foreign keys: FK: PLAYS.musician -> MUSICIAN.ssn FK: PLAYS.instrument -> INSTRUMENT.name write an SQL query to get the total number of instruments played by each musician born after 1990, whose address is unknown. Hint: you can extract the year from a date through the YEAR() function. 3. (12 points) Draw an ER schema based on the following data requirements You are asked to design a database for managing maintenance inspections executed by workers at different machinery. The database must contain a list of workers. The workers are identified by a unique code and are characterized by their name, surname, and may have one or more telephone numbers. Each worker is assigned to one or more products. Each product is identified by the bar code and is characterized by the list of categories to which it belongs, the duration in hours of its production process and the cost. The database must contain a list of machinery. Each machinery is identified by a unique code and is characterized by a brand and a model. The machinery can be either production machinery or quality control machinery. For production machinery, the maximum energy consumption is known, while the quality attribute is known for quality control machinery. You are requested to keep track of all the maintenance inspections that workers have carried out on the various machinery. A worker can carry out multiple inspections on the same machinery at different times. A machinery can receive multiple inspections from different workers at different times. At the same time, a worker can have multiple inspections on different machinery in progress. You are requested to keep track of the start date and time, and the end date and time of each inspection.