Business Information Systems Bachelor's degree in Digital Economics and Business Prof. Alex Mircoli Written exam - 28/05/2024 1. (10 points) Describe the K-means algorithm 2. (8 points) Given the following relations: PERSON(ssn, first_name, last_name, age) BUYS(person, car, date) CAR(plate, model, price) and the following foreign keys: FK: BUYS.person -> PERSON.ssn FK: BUYS.car -> CAR.plate write an SQL query to get the average price of cars bought in 2023 by people whose names end with the letter ‘i’, grouping the results by month Hint: you can extract the year and the month from a date through, respectively, the YEAR() and the MONTH() function. 3. (12 points) Draw an ER schema based on the following data requirements A digital library allows users to browse, borrow, and review books. The platform includes several core functionalities such as user management, book management, borrowing process, and reviews. Users can register, log in, and update their profiles. Each user has a unique ID, name, email, password, and address. There are two categories of users: readers and librarians. Librarians are supervised by a supervisor, who is also a librarian. The library offers various books. Each book has a unique ID, title, author, publication year, genre, and availability (available/not available). Users can borrow books. Each borrowing transaction has a unique ID, start date, due date, and status (e.g., active, returned, overdue). A user can borrow a maximum of 3 books each time; each book can be borrowed multiple times (sometimes by the same user). Users can leave reviews for the books they have borrowed. Each review has a unique ID, rating (1 5), comment, and review date. For each review, it is important to keep information on the user that left it and the book for which it was left.