Extra exercises Conceptual design EXERCISE: Draw an ER schema for a DB which will support a beauty center in giving its customers the possibility to purchase products or book treatments. The database will manage data related to suppliers, customers, various types of products, and employees. • For suppliers, we need to save: VAT number, company name, contact details, addresses (a supplier may have more than one address. We also need to know which products are supplied by which suppliers and to save the invoices related to each order. Several products may be contained in a single order. • For customers, we need to save some basic personal information (e.g., name, address, birthdate…). A customer may book a treatment or buy a product. The database should save information about the treatments and the products bought by each customer. • For products, we want to save the name, the price and the available quantity. • For treatments, we need to save information about the name, the price and the employee performing the treatment. There are two main typologies of treatment: body treatments and facial treatments. • For employees, we want to save the name and the specializations (an employee may have many specializations). SOLUTION: Translation into relations EXERCISE: Translate the ER diagram of the previous exercise into a set of relations. SOLUTION: SUPPLIER(VAT_number, company_name, phone_number, email) ADDRESS(address, supplier) FK: ADDRESS.supplier -> SUPPLIER.VAT_number INVOICE(ID, amount, date) PRODUCT(ID, name, price) ORDER(supplier, invoice, product, date) FK: ORDER.supplier -> SUPPLIER.VAT_number FK: ORDER.invoice -> INVOICE.ID FK: ORDER.product -> PRODUCT.ID CUSTOMER(SSN, name, address, birthdate) BUYS(product, customer, date) FK: BUYS.product -> PRODUCT.ID FK: BUYS.customer -> CUSTOMER.SSN TREATMENT(ID, name, price, type) type = ENUM(“body treatment”, “facial_treatment”) BOOKS(customer, treatment, date) FK: BOOKS.customer -> CUSTOMER.SSN FK: BOOKS.treatment -> TREATMENT.ID EMPLOYEE(ID, name) SPECIALIZATION(specialization, employee) FK: SPECIALIZATION.employee -> EMPLOYEE.ID PERFORMS(treatment, employee) FK: PERFORMS.treatment -> TREATMENT.ID FK: PERFORMS.employee -> EMPLOYEE.ID SQL QUERIES Write the following SQL queries based on the relations of the previous exercise. Q1: Extract the ID of the employees whose name is unknown SELECT ID FROM EMPLOYEE WHERE name IS NULL Q2: Extract all the products ordered from the supplier “Amazon” SELECT name FROM PRODUCT p JOIN ORDER o ON p.ID = o.product JOIN SUPPLIER s ON o.supplier = s.VAT_number WHERE s.company_name = “Amazon” Q3: Show the list of the product names, showing each name just once SELECT DISTINCT name FROM product Q4: Show the SSN of the customers born before 2002, whose names start with a “B” SELECT SSN FROM CUSTOMER WHERE name LIKE ‘B%’ AND YEAR(birthdate) < 2002 Q5: Show the average amount of the invoices for each month of the year, only for the supplier having VAT_number = “123456” SELECT AVG(amount) FROM INVOICE i JOIN ORDER o ON i.ID = o.invoice WHERE o.supplier = “123456” GROUP BY MONTH(i.date)